The philosophy of history is a

## What is History Bullet Points
These are basic bullet points that will be written into a summary.
- Before the 20th century history was conducted through the lens of the validity of all events. Facts were final and there was little room for interpretation. However, as time has gone on different views of history have started to formulate. Croce viewed "all history as contemporary history", which means that history consists of the evaluation of the validity of historical facts. Carl Becker believed historical facts don't exist until a "historian creates them". Collingwood can be summarised as the philosophy of history is interested in the relation between the past, and the historians thought about it. This history is in many ways in the present as well as the past. Which means the historians zeitgeist will influence the interpretation of events. Furthermore, history should be imaginatively understood, as the views of people change throughout history. Edward Carr concludes this section by noting that the "function of the historian is neither to love the past, nor emancipate himself from the past, but to master and understand it as the key to understanding of the present". Carr notes that Collingwood's view is dangerous as pragmatists could rewrite history to suit a purpose. Carr mostly agrees with Collingwood saying historians are unable to distance themselves from their own time. Establishing a middle ground where historians should meld their interpretation to the facts but be aware of their own interpretations effects on the facts. With the interpretation subtly changing from an initial view as facts are discovered. Carr concludes with the statement "What is History?, is that it is a continuous process of interaction between the historian and his facts, an unending dialogue between the present and the past". {Note by Nathan historians in many ways assign value to the facts depending on their views, with Marxists viewing in the importance of the lower classes, Whig history focusing on the march towards democracy, while traditionalists demand the value of the politicians and rulers who make decisions.}
- Carr discusses the importance of individuals and societies. Carr discusses the inseparability of society and the individual. With humans from their birth turned into "social units" by the world we inhabit. The historian is therefore the "product of history, before he begins to write history". He is in "flux", with a reader being required to look at the data of publication of the writing to understand the views of the historian. "I shall venture to believe that the historian who is most conscious of his own situation is also more capable of transcending it, and more capable of appreciating the essential nature of the differences between his own society and the outlook of other periods". Before you study the historian study his historical and social environment. Carr argues that the "great man is always representative either of existing forces or of forces which he helps create by way of challenge to existing authority". He concludes with the statement "the past is only intelligible to us only in the light of the present; and we can fully understand the present only in the light of the past. To enable man to understand the society of the past and to increase his mastery over the society of the present is the dual function of history".
- This chapter is all over the place tbh. Carr argues that periodization of history is controversial as it is not a fact, but rather a tool of thought. Carr attempts to align science with historical practices. Carr notes that a historian uses analogies throughout his work as they are interested in what is general in the unique. For example a historian characterises all wars, as wars, and all revolutions, as revolutions. "History thrives on generalisations" with this making a historian a historian, rather than a collector of facts. The point of this generalisations is to take lessons from history. "To learn from about the present in the light of the past means also to learn about the past in the light of the present". This all leads to science which is also about making generalizations as to make future predictions. He furthers that a historians job isn't to hang judgement upon figures but rather systems, with a moral conceptual framework. This framework uses words like progressive and reactionary instead of good and evil as history is constantly moving. Carr wants to make history more scientific.
- History is centrally about the multiple causes of why events happen. With the historian ranking these causes. Carr notes that history is both caused by previous events, but also ushered in by the actions of individuals.
- Carr discredits the idea of history following a progression metanarrative. He first points to religious theology which characterised history under this lens, before the enlightenment secularised the view of progress, with the most recent attempt to characterise history being by Marxists. Carr concludes the only progress is the learned skills from the previous generation. He furthers the idea that if the idea of progress is kept one has to be aware that it is not equal. Carr discusses objectivity within history, stating that only through consistent shifts in view can we become more objective about events. "History acquires meaning and objectivity when it establishes a coherent relation between past and future". Carr conludes with the view that history is not like theology by assigning meaning to the past through a particular lens, or literature where stories are collated without meaning, but rather its own subject which has its own idiosyncrasies. This central idiosyncrasy is the idea of progress and its importance is greater as it rationalises the conduct of the present with an interpretation of the past. If you remove progress society will be directionless.

## Misc
Can history be seen as the study of all human information, past and future.