*The Structure of Scientific Revolutions* is a book by Thomas Kuhn published in 1962. Kuhn's thesis throughout the book centers around a redefinition of how scientific history, and science in general, is interpreted. Traditional scientific thinking commonly saw the development of science as linear; where the developments progressively built upon each other as to form a modern day scientific consensus. Kuhn saw this view as incorrect and posited the concept of the paradigm. The **paradigm** is the current scientific consensus in which scientific research is based off. Through this lens of paradigms Kuhn notes scientific history can be interpreted.

Kuhn mapped the development of a **pre-science** into a **normal science**. A normal science being one which past scientific research is firmly based upon. Kuhn observed that a science first starts as a variety of differing theories which normally branch off another science. These theories vie for dominance until one is established as the **paradigm** of that science.

Kuhn concludes that the central **paradigm's** of a science change throughout history. This process happens as a paradigm is unable to model the world correctly despite scientists attempts to define the world within this model. This inability for a model to function is called an **anomaly** which leads to greater debate around the current paradigm. This leads to a **crisis** resulting in new research, called **extraordinary research**, which loosens the rules of the paradigm as to modify the current model, or find a new one. However, there is commonly opposition to this, especially in cases of entrenched paradigms, which can lead to a change of the social and cultural climate. This results in multiple outcomes. Those being:
- The current model is modified to solve the crisis.
- The anomaly is ignored and given to later scientists to solve.
- A new candidate for a paradigm emerges leading to a **paradigm war** between the old and new interpretations.

The acceptance of this new theory is called a **paradigm shift** which through its discovery a **scientific revolution** occurs. This scientific revolution, which is noted to be similar to political revolutions, leads to a rejection of the old paradigms and research through the current lens of the new paradigm. A common aspect of these new paradigms are they are usually established by those with less entrenched beliefs. Thus, through an outsider lens they are able to redefine science.

Some objections to Kuhn's views focus on the fact a scientist can work within multiple frameworks. Furthermore many of these older frameworks are not commonly challenged with only the extravagant claims being refuted. These are a **logical positivist** view