Cryptography is the field of encoding and decoding messages. It is used within [[Cybersecurity|cybersecurity]] to encode messages sent over the [[Internet|internet]].

**Symmetric** cryptography is the idea of both having a **cryptographic key** that is shared between two users. This cryptographic key is commonly based on **Substitution-Boxes** where a look-up table is created with the required replacements. In addition to substitutions the message is also scrambled. **Advanced Encryption Standard** (AES) uses 14 cycles in a 256-bit versions of the AES. AES works on message blocks by providing confidentiality on blocks and chaining them together. This process is called **block chaining** where an initialization vector combines each encrypted block. This **Cipher Block Chaining** (CBC) creates a message authentication code. While symmetric cryptography is efficient it lacks an ability to securely share the key, and lacks scalability.

**Public Key Cryptography** is based on a hard math problem that creates a large random number, that is used as the cipher key. This private key then functions to unlock the public key. An example of this is the 1977 encryption method where the cipher is equal to $(message)^e \pmod n$ and the message is equal to $(cipher)^e \pmod n$. The math problem which is commonly used normally uses two large prime numbers as they are difficult to solve. **Hash functions** are used to compute these keys quickly with SHA1, SHA-256 and SHA-384 being common examples of these functions.
